---
layout: post
title: "TweetyNet Eco-Acoustic Event Detection"
date: 2022-02-09
---

It is important to understand the health of the planet’s ecosystems in order to help conserve them. One way that has been employed to assess the health of ecosystems is audio event detection, which uses the sound generated by animals to detect their presence and indirectly gauge the health of an ecosystem and is the goal of the TweetyNet machine learning model. Audio event detection has benefited conservation efforts because it allows researchers to automate the task of detecting the presence of birds with the use of machine learning techniques. A brief example of audio event detection in everyday use is hands-free interfacing, which detects the presence of spoken voice commands in order to perform the desired action. Eco-acoustic event detection is audio event detection with the intended use of detecting sounds that are characteristic of an ecosystem and can be used to assess the health of ecosystems. One of the most useful indicators of an ecosystem’s health are bird vocalizations, which are relatively easy to separate from the background noise of an environment. The usefulness of detecting bird presence through their vocalizations presents a challenge, as manual inspection and annotation of audio data is a painstaking process. Through the use of machine learning, we can anticipate a reduction in time spent manually annotating and identifying birds’ vocalizations which will allow researchers to monitor and learn about ecosystems with greater accuracy and efficiency. Birds inhabit and share nearly every environmental niche and are more sensitive to ecological change than other kinds of animals and so are capable of representing the biodiversity of ecosystems disturbed by deforestation and climate change. By applying eco-acoustic event detection to birds, it can also be adapted to the detection of other so-called ‘indicator’ species. Beyond measuring ecological health, eco-acoustic detection can accumulate environmental information, refine our understanding, and reflect on the impact of human activity on our planet’s health. All of these goals are possible applications of the TweetyNet model.
